---
title: "Tracing Evolving Networks Using Tensor Factorizations vs. ICA-Based Approaches"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2022-04-25-tracing-evolving-networks-parafac2-ica
excerpt: 'In this paper, we compare the PARAFAC2 method and joint ICA and IVA for tracing evolving networks from fMRI data. It is a continuation of the work published at ICASSP&apos;20'
date: 2022-04-25
venue: 'Frontiers in neuroscience'
paperurl: 'https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fnins.2022.861402/full'
citation: 'Acar E, Roald M, Hossain KM, Calhoun VD, Adali T. Tracing Evolving Networks Using Tensor Factorizations vs. ICA-Based Approaches. Frontiers in neuroscience. 2022;16.'
---

Analysis of time-evolving data is crucial to understand the functioning of dynamic systems such as the brain. For instance, analysis of functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data collected during a task may reveal spatial regions of interest, and how they evolve during the task. However, capturing underlying spatial patterns as well as their change in time is challenging. The traditional approach in fMRI data analysis is to assume that underlying spatial regions of interest are static. In this article, using fractional amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations (fALFF) as an effective way to summarize the variability in fMRI data collected during a task, we arrange time-evolving fMRI data as a subjects by voxels by time windows tensor, and analyze the tensor using a tensor factorization-based approach called a PARAFAC2 model to reveal spatial dynamics. The PARAFAC2 model jointly analyzes data from multiple time windows revealing subject-mode patterns, evolving spatial regions (also referred to as networks) and temporal patterns. We compare the PARAFAC2 model with matrix factorization-based approaches relying on independent components, namely, joint independent component analysis (ICA) and independent vector analysis (IVA), commonly used in neuroimaging data analysis. We assess the performance of the methods in terms of capturing evolving networks through extensive numerical experiments demonstrating their modeling assumptions. In particular, we show that (i) PARAFAC2 provides a compact representation in all modes, i.e., subjects, time, and voxels, revealing temporal patterns as well as evolving spatial networks, (ii) joint ICA is as effective as PARAFAC2 in terms of revealing evolving networks but does not reveal temporal patterns, (iii) IVA's performance depends on sample size, data distribution and covariance structure of underlying networks. When these assumptions are satisfied, IVA is as accurate as the other methods, (iv) when subject-mode patterns differ from one time window to another, IVA is the most accurate. Furthermore, we analyze real fMRI data collected during a sensory motor task, and demonstrate that a component indicating statistically significant group difference between patients with schizophrenia and healthy controls is captured, which includes primary and secondary motor regions, cerebellum, and temporal lobe, revealing a meaningful spatial map and its temporal change.